Gap-7: Functions Diagnose (B → A) — Trigger + Durable troubleshooting (#1641)
microsoft/GitHub-Copilot-for-Azure: plugin/skills/azure-diagnostics/references/functions/triggers.md

```

**Diagnose:**
```bash
# Check dead-letter queue depth
az servicebus queue show -n QUEUE --namespace-name NS -g RG \
  --query "{dlqCount:countDetails.deadLetterMessageCount, activeCount:countDetails.activeMessageCount}"

# View dead-letter message contents
# If your tooling cannot inspect DLQ message bodies directly, use one of the following:
#   - Service Bus Explorer in the Azure portal (Service Bus namespace -> Queues -> <QUEUE> -> Dead-letter)
#   - An Azure Service Bus SDK (for example, .NET, Java, Python, or JavaScript) with a receiver scoped to:
#       "<QUEUE>/$DeadLetterQueue"
#     and using a "peek" or "receive" operation to inspect messages.
```

---

## Cosmos DB Trigger Issues

| Symptom | Cause | Fix |
|---------|-------|-----|
| Trigger not firing | Lease container missing | Create lease container (default: `leases`) in same database |
| Change feed lag | Insufficient RU/s on lease container | Increase RU/s on leases container or enable autoscale |
| Duplicate processing | Multiple apps share lease container | Configure a unique `leaseContainerPrefix` on each Cosmos DB trigger binding per function app, or use separate lease containers |

> | Partial document data | Projection or TTL conflict | Ensure `StartFromBeginning` config and verify no TTL on lease container |

Reviewer: `StartFromBeginning` cannot resolve a partial document payload. It only changes where a trigger first starts reading, and it is ignored after leases or checkpoints exist. TTL on the lease container is also unrelated to the document payload, so this row directs operators toward a remediation that cannot fix the symptom. Replace it with a payload-specific diagnosis, such as inspecting the binding or deserialization/projection configuration.

| 401 Unauthorized | Auth level mismatch | Verify `authLevel` in function.json matches request (function key vs anonymous) |
| 404 Not Found | Route prefix misconfigured | Check `host.json` `extensions.http.routePrefix` — default is `api` |
| CORS blocked | Missing allowed origins | `az functionapp cors add -n APP -g RG --allowed-origins "https://DOMAIN"` |
| 408 / timeout | Long-running execution or HTTP client/gateway idle timeout | Check `functionTimeout` in host.json (execution timeout) and client/front-end idle limits. For long-running work use async patterns (202 + status endpoint or Durable HTTP APIs), or move to Premium for longer sync executions. |

**KQL — HTTP errors by status code:**
```kql
requests
| where timestamp > ago(1h)
| where toint(resultCode) >= 400
| summarize count() by resultCode, operation_Name
| order by count_ desc
```

**Diagnose:**
```bash
# Check function host status
az functionapp show -n APP -g RG --query "state"

# Test function endpoint directly
curl -s -w "\n%{http_code}" "https://APP.azurewebsites.net/api/FUNCTION?code=FUNCTION_KEY"
```

---

## Timer Trigger Issues

| Symptom | Cause | Fix |
|---------|-------|-----|

> | Timer never fires | Invalid NCRONTAB expression | Validate with `NCrontab.Advanced` — field order: `{second} {minute} {hour} {day} {month} {day-of-week}` |

Reviewer 2: **[MEDIUM]** `NCrontab.Advanced` isn't actionable user guidance - it's an internal library reference.

Users troubleshooting timer triggers need the format spec, not a library name. The field order you already include is the useful part.

```suggestion
| Timer never fires | Invalid NCRONTAB expression | Verify the 6-field NCRONTAB format: `{second} {minute} {hour} {day} {month} {day-of-week}` |
```
